I sang the opening solo of the final song of the "Let There Be Light" Christmas concert to a crowd of over two thousand people. Countless hours had been poured into crafting the concert, but no one invested more time and effort than Dr. Aaron Jackson who led the choir and orchestra with precision, patience, persistence, and an exceptional sense of humor. His enthusiasm electrified the choir, filled the music, and stunned the audience. If this energy had been condensed into a cup of coffee, it would have wakened a paralytic — "Let There Be Light" indeed.

Aaron Jackson had a strong sense of humor. For instance, he began the Campbell University joint choir practice with one of his favorite one-liners: "If it ain't Baroque, don't fix it.” During one Wednesday night practice, our youth choir was singing the word "Hallelujah" when, to Aaron Jackson's dismay, we sang the end of the word "Hallelu - yuh" like the word "yummy." He instructed us to sing it like "Hallelu - yaw" like a German saying "Yah, man" or, even better, like my new nick-name: "Yah - cob" ("Jacob" with a twist.) But Aaron Jackson also expressed humor through his facial expressions and the brightness of his eyes — like how he described the choir's proper expression: "From your nose down, your face should look like an opera singer; from your nose up, your should have the excitement of a first-grade teacher." Even when a choir member was difficult, his eyes shone — sometimes even brighter. One Wednesday, when the youth choir warbled hideously out of tune, Aaron Jackson flung his music binder aside, flopped to the ground, and rolled around on the white, speckled linoleum floor — exclaiming, "Oh my stars..." in agony from hearing the painful disharmony.

Aaron Jackson had energy. Every Wednesday and Sunday, he blazed through hours and hours of practice with the adult choir, the youth choir, the chamber choir, and the orchestra. Sometimes he would be so excited about a musical piece he would ask the choir to repeat it out of sheer joy. In fact, he made the choir repeat the Hallelujah Chorus perfectly three consecutive times. When conducting, Aaron Jackson's entire body would take on the song's rhythm and timbre: he would bounce up and down on the conductor's stand, his right arm would meter the time signature, and the expression of the music animated his every feature. For example, if an arrangement was bold and resounding, Dr. Jackson assumed wide and sweeping gestures and wore an expression of intense valor. Aaron Jackson was where he wanted to be.

Aaron Jackson taught music with precision. For instance, he taught the choir to have "tall" vowels. Choirs often have "flat" vowels and, consequently, a collective southern accent. Such flat vowels might turn "A mighty fortress is our God" into "I my dee fort dress is are God." As Aaron Jackson would remind us, "We're not a country town choir, you know.” These tall vowels are created by opening the space near the back of your jaw — similar to when you yawn. This space will change a tinny "me" into a resonant "may," and such resonance allows a listener to feel the vibration of the music, even from the back seat of an auditorium. Aaron Jackson also taught coordinated consonants. For instance, if consonants were disregarded, "immense and free," might easily become, "Immensss an free". Instead, Aaron Jackson taught leaving the consonant off till the next word so "s"s don't fizzle out or, worse, certain consonants disappear altogether. For example, we would sing "Immense and free," like "Immen san dfree," which not only reduces mispronounced consonants, but also allows the choir to sing consonants in unison.

Aaron Jackson also taught musical self-evaluation. He would often ask the choir to identify their mistakes like an alto volunteering "I think the altos were a little off-pitch" or a tenor saying "The bass section was too quiet" (because they always were.)  On the Sunday after one Easter, the youth choir tenors came in hideously off-tune. But during the next practice when Aaron Jackson asked what went wrong, the lead tenor, the only youth who could truly sing the tenor part, took the mistake upon himself and admitted to leading the tenor section in singing the wrong note. These analyses taught me an ear for music. Before joining the youth choir, I had attempted to harmonize with little success, but now, I could harmonize with any hymn. What's more, I began experimenting on the piano, eventually sounding out my favorite song, "Faded." Aaron Jackson taught music with excellence.

Dr. Jackson achieved remarkable results. He built a talented musical community. For instance, the piano accompanist, Karen Bullock, could take any complicated piece of sheet music and play it perfectly on the first try. In addition, all four members of the Danchi family played violin and viola professionally, and two sisters played in the orchestra weekly. Aaron Jackson's music was so attractive to local musicians that there were enough talented musicians and singers for a full choir and orchestra every week. Second, Aaron Jackson conducted beautiful concerts. Sometimes only weeks after one Christmas performance, Aaron Jackson would have made his selection for the next. And when this performance finally came, the auditorium was packed. Seats were lined against the wall, and they too were filled. I was thankful the youth choir had reserved seating — we might have had to stand otherwise. Aaron Jackson lived the music when he stood on the conductor's podium. His face took on a heavenly visage and his eyes glowed with inner light. The music was deep, rich, resounding, pure, lovely. It was as if Aaron Jackson wielded the full power of the music — music that melted hearts and touched souls. Aaron Jackson's music was heavenly.

But was Aaron Jackson's enthusiasm unique in my experience? No. Unlike many students, I've been fortunate to have many energetic teachers and mentors. Initially, I assumed their enthusiasm was an eccentricity acquired at birth. But eventually, I discovered that these people were the same in one vital way: they loved their work.

Beth Grose, for instance, loved teaching science. Every year she would play "The Periodic Table of Elements" song for the new batch of chemistry students. She would bounce her head from side to side and sing along to "There's hydrogen and helium, then lithium, beryllium." She had a song for polyatomic ions too. No one could accuse Mrs. Grose of being boring! Even during her lectures, she would interrupt relevant course study to answer students' random questions such as "Why is hydrogen used in hydrogen bombs?" When it came time for the chemiluminescence lab, Mrs. Grose prepared everything: she got blackout blinds for the windows and moved all 25 students and 12 tables into one room. As soon as the reactants were mixed and all lights went off, Mrs. Grose would call out the time intervals — one minute, two minutes, three — and we would all write whether the chemicals in the glass vial were brighter than the minute before. We even measured whose reaction shone the brightest. Mrs. Grose made labs worth remembering. Even after class, Mrs. Grose would talk about science-related topics — sometimes at great length. For example, she spent thirty minutes discussing screen radiation, citing studies showing phone-shaped tumors, and showing off her radiation-proof phone purse. Inspiring others to be passionate about science brought Beth Grose joy.

Sue Gray was passionate about mock trial, having dedicated twenty years of her life to volunteer coaching. Mock trial is a simulated courtroom competition complete with attorneys, witnesses, affidavits, evidence, a judge, and a jury. As soon as the annual case was released, Mrs. Gray read the case with feverish intensity. Every week, she would quiz her students on their knowledge of the case. Every week, she would share discoveries she had made about the case. In fact, she would often perform example testimony in character: an expert witness would become a superlative academic and the best friend of the deceased would become a distraught college student. Whenever student attorneys practiced objection arguments, "Judge" Gray became an independent arbitrator and ruled in whichever way seemed to her inconvenient to her students' case. Beyond class-time participation, Mrs. Gray expected a high level of independent collaboration. Some students would work over the phone for hours, and others would gather at each other's houses to study and discuss the case late into the night. But outside of the classroom, Mrs. Gray formed a community of real attorneys, real judges, and other teachers passionate about mock trial. Several months before the regional tournaments, Mrs. Gray would organize scrimmage matches between about a dozen teams, recruiting an army of volunteer judges. Moreover, Mrs. Gray's friendships with the best coaches in the state enabled her teams to scrimmage against the best teams in the state. But at the end of the year, whether or not our team won regionals, Mrs. Gray would hold her end-of-year award ceremony, praising by name every student's initiative, contribution, or growth. Teaching mock trial brought Sue Gray joy.


**Before**

Caleb Woods is passionate about leading RoleModel Software. Every year, Mr. Woods carefully selects applicants for the "RoleModel Academy" (a training program) based off three attributes: self-motivation, a desire to learn, and solid communication skills. Although programmers are known for their horrendous public speaking abilities, this year's Academy cohort presented their educations and backgrounds to the company with ease and clarity — one even had the whole company laughing. The Academy isn't a standard programming course either; it's designed to train new programmers in the essential programming habits (such as testing your code) so that **in about eight to ten y**ears, they can become "Software Craftsman" (the RoleModel equivalent of a senior developer). Mr. Woods personally leads the Academy, reviewing students' code daily for the first week or so of the Academy. If a student's code contains a feature without a corresponding test, all his new work is immediately and irrevocably deleted — the code equivalent of capital punishment. Ask me how I know. Mr. Woods is not only integrally involved in hiring and training, but is also deeply involved in design, development, and marketing. For example, Mr. Woods is the visionary behind much of RoleModel's marketing content, working closely with that team for hours. But more than lead a business, Mr. Woods cultivates a community at RoleModel. For example, our daily check-in ha**s an "On My Mind" f**ield, where countless fascinating conversations have been started. These conversations can range from solar eclipses to music composition to golf. One of Mr. Wood's recent posts reads: 
	On My Mind:
	- Sun burn
	- Getting more consistent with golf shots
	- Why every time I hit a great shot yesterday, @Jamie Meeker (an employee) hit one just slightly better
Furthermore, employees get to know each other over our weekly meeting where Mr. Woods caters a meal and people present what they're working on, things they've been learning about, or even propose tooling changes. No one wants to miss these discussions. This weekly meeting begins with a rotation of about four employees answe**ring check-in questions** such as "What's your highlight for the last month?" or "What books have you read recently?" My all-time favorite question is "What would you do if you had nothing to do on a random Tuesday?" Answers to this question always teach me about the other employees, whether they love gardening or would like to read Dante's *Inferno*. Many of these weekly presentations focus on personal development, such as Mark Kraemer's presentation on "The Science of Motivation," and the following conversions are fascinating. Take our discussion on deep work, for instance, John Calvin Young explained how his best work often happens after 10 pm when no one is around. Mr. Woods added that John's team sometimes moved their morning meetings later to accommodate him. Mr. Woods loves optimizing — even if it's after 10 pm at night. For example, after a discussion on leadership, Mr. Woods asked the entire company how he could lead better as he said "from anyone at any time." Additionally, Mr. Woods hosts a paid yearly retreat, where employee's families are invited and the main focus is self-improvement and community fellowship, often including company-wide games of frisbee. 

Caleb Woods loves developing software, leading by example, and building the RoleModel community. Within a few years of being hired at RoleModel Software, the company founder realized Mr. Wood's tremendous potential and began mentoring him in all aspects of the business, hoping he would someday lead the company as CEO, which Mr. Woods accomplished within a few years. 

Mr. Woods has high technical standards. 
The "RoleModel Academy", for instance, is designed to place novice programmers on a clear path to become "Software Craftsman" (senior developers) in eight to ten years if they're willing to grow and learn. At the same time, the Academy allows RoleModel to train its own talent in the "RoleModel Way" (best practices) of programming instead of outsourcing developers.
Furthermore, Mr. Woods personally teaches the Academy, leading daily code reviews for the first few weeks. And if a student attends a check-in meeting with untested code, their new feature is immediately and irrevocably deleted, and they are forced to restart — the code equivalent of capital punishment. 

But Mr. Woods values interpersonal skills too — perhaps more than technical ability. 
Mr. Woods' interview process thoroughly tests applicant's ability to explain their thoughts with minimal reference to basic programing knowledge.
In fact, although programmers are known known for their horrendous public speaking abilities, this year's Academy cohort presented their educations and backgrounds to the company with ease and clarity — one even had the whole company laughing.
Furthermore, developers are regularly expected to give presentations to real customers, a key step in becoming a Craftsman.

Mr. Woods also focuses company time and resources toward fostering teamwork and community. 
For example, every week, he hosts a catered meal and meeting where employees are invited to present on topics of interest, whether it's "Browser Workspace Organization" or "Motivation and Dopamine" 
This meeting also includes a weekly check-in where Mr. Woods asks a rotation of employees a set of questions like "What have read recently?" "What was a highlight from the past month?" and (my favorite) "What would you do if you didn't have any work on a random Tuesday?" 
I always learn

Mr. Woods was selected by the company's founder to become the next CEO because of his incredible leadership, communication, and technical ability. For example, Mr. Woods personally teaches the "Academy" (RoleModel's training program), leading daily code reviews for the first few weeks of the Academy. And sometimes Mr. Woods reenforces essential programming rules in a dramatic fashion. For instance, if an Academy student comes to a check-in meeting with an untested feature (breaking one of those essential programming rules), their feature is immediately and irrevocably deleted — the code equivalent of capital punishment. Mr. Woods also cares for his employees. The Academy, for instance, is designed to put novice programmers on a clear path to becoming a "Software Craftsman" (senior developer) in eight to ten years. Mr. Woods also hosts a catered meal and meeting where employees are invited to present on topics of interest, whether it's "The Science of Motivation" or "The Case of the Uncreated Index" (a success story.) This meeting includes a weekly check-in where Mr. Woods asks a rotation of employees a set of questions such as "What have read recently?" "What was a highlight from the past month?" and (my favorite) "What would you do if you didn't have any work on a random Tuesday?" I always learn so much about other people, whether they like gardening or want to read Dante's *Inferno*. Employees also get to know each other better over RoleModel's quarterly experimentation days, where Mr. Woods pays travel expenses for people to gather in person. What's more, employees are invited to propose experiments such as modeling bezier curves (before the clients need them), speeding up test suites, or improving documentation. Mr. Woods also hosts an annual paid retreat, where employee's families are invited for a time of community fellowship, often including company-wide games of frisbee. Mr. Woods emphasizes interpersonal skill. This year's Academy cohort, for instance, presented their educations and backgrounds to the company with ease and clarity — one even had the whole company laughing. Furthermore, at our weekly meeting, Mr. Woods often presents on how to develop great listening, communication, and leadership skills. After his lecture on leadership, Mr. Woods asked the whole company how he could improve his own leadership. He truly desired feedback, as he said, "from anyone at any time."

Caleb Woods loves developing his company's software, business, employees, and community. Within a few years of being hired at RoleModel Software, Mr. Woods was selected by the company's founder to become the next CEO because of his incredible leadership, communication, and technical ability. For example, Mr. Woods personally teaches the "Academy" (RoleModel's training program), leading daily code reviews for the first few weeks of the Academy. And sometimes Mr. Woods reenforces essential programming rules in a dramatic fashion. For instance, if an Academy student comes to a check-in meeting with an untested feature (breaking one of those essential programming rules), their feature is immediately and irrevocably deleted — the code equivalent of capital punishment. Mr. Woods also cares for his employees. The Academy, for instance, is designed to put novice programmers on a clear path to becoming a "Software Craftsman" (senior developer) in eight to ten years. Mr. Woods also hosts a catered meal and meeting where employees are invited to present on topics of interest, whether it's "The Science of Motivation" or "The Case of the Uncreated Index" (a success story.) This meeting includes a weekly check-in where Mr. Woods asks a rotation of employees a set of questions such as "What have read recently?" "What was a highlight from the past month?" and (my favorite) "What would you do if you didn't have any work on a random Tuesday?" I always learn so much about other people, whether they like gardening or want to read Dante's *Inferno*. Employees also get to know each other better over RoleModel's quarterly experimentation days, where Mr. Woods pays travel expenses for people to gather in person. What's more, employees are invited to propose experiments such as modeling bezier curves (before the clients need them), speeding up test suites, or improving documentation. Mr. Woods also hosts an annual paid retreat, where employee's families are invited for a time of community fellowship, often including company-wide games of frisbee. Mr. Woods emphasizes interpersonal skill. This year's Academy cohort, for instance, presented their educations and backgrounds to the company with ease and clarity — one even had the whole company laughing. Furthermore, at our weekly meeting, Mr. Woods often presents on how to develop great listening, communication, and leadership skills. After his lecture on leadership, Mr. Woods asked the whole company how he could improve his own leadership. He truly desired feedback, as he said, "from anyone at any time."


Aaron Jackson, Beth Grose, Sue Grey, and Caleb Woods love their work: Aaron Jackson rolled around on the floor to make his point to the youth choir; Beth Gross interrupted important study time to answer any student's questions; Sue Grey volunteered twenty years of her life to mock trial coaching; and Caleb Woods takes time out his busy schedule to review Academy students' work. But whether these people intended it or not, they created communities of shared passion because they attract people to the work they love. Before taking Mrs. Grose's chemistry class, I never realized the beautiful balance of chemistry. Before participating in Sue Grey's mock trial team, I never saw the importance of eloquent argumentation. These people changed me; they revealed the beauty of what they found most beautiful.

But they also changed how I saw work. I had always wanted "easy life," but the easy life isn't one filled with people or passion or joy. The best life is filled with fascination — whether it's music, science, speech, technology, or something different. These people inspire me to find work I love and spend the rest of my life doing it.